“Who Is James?”
Hello, my name is James Hober and I will be explaining Ted Greene's V-System to you
as well as I can. Who am I and how did I come to be the one to expound Ted's V-
System? I was a poor student of Ted's.
I'm laughing right now because the one thing that Paul Vachon told me not to say in my
introduction of myself was that I was a poor student. Paul is the indefatigable and
leading contributor to tedgreene.com. But sorry, Paul, I was.
Don't get me wrong: I'm a very serious student and teacher of the guitar, having been
playing for over forty years and teaching for over thirty. But I have to confess that,
decades ago, when I studied with Ted, I practiced the material he gave me only so
much, whereas I was practicing other things fairly intensely. I probably took a few
dozen lessons from Ted. Others studied much more with him. I took a lesson at most
once a month. Others took weekly or biweekly lessons, sometimes for years or even
decades.
When I came to Ted for my first lesson, I already had a BA in music and had been
studying and playing guitar for quite a while. Ted, in addition to being an outstanding
guitarist, seemed to be a very different guitarist than I was, strong in areas that I was
weak in, and so that drew me to want to study with him. He asked me what I wanted
to study. A normal person probably would have said something like, "chord melody"
or "solo guitar," since Ted was a genius at that. But I said, "basics." You see, when I was
a teenager I studied a tiny bit of karate. I never made it past the very beginning, white
belt level. But they told me that a black belt meant "master of the basics.” So that's why
I told Ted I wanted to learn basics, even though I already had considerable music
theory knowledge and guitar background.
Ted started giving me papers of V-2 or V-4 chords on various string sets, maybe on the
top four strings or on the bottom four, etc. He didn't say much about what V-2 or V-4
meant. Just that "V" stood for "voicing group." Some of these chords I already knew
and some I didn't. I got better at knowing and using them. Then I got into V-1s, V-3s,
and V-5s. But I started to want an overview. I wanted to see the big picture. I knew
that the V-System dealt with four note chords. So I asked myself, "How many four note
chords are there, if I exclude transpositions, homonyms, and inversions?" To find out I
started writing out a chart:
1) C - Db - D - Eb cluster of half-steps
2) C - Db - D - E C#m Maj7 b9 (no 5th)
3) C - Db - Eb - E Eb7/6/b9 (no 3rd or 5th)
4) C - D - Eb - E Eb maj 7/6/b9 (no 3rd or 5th)
and so on. It took quite a while to meticulously work out a listing.

“Who Is James?” page 2
At my next lesson, I was ready to impress Ted with my chart. I asked him, "So Ted, do
you know how many four distinct note chords there are?" And he instantly blurted out,
"Forty-three!" I was floored. Not only had he already systematically pursued this
arcane trail, he also had the knowledge at his instant recall. He quickly wrote out for
me all 43 permutations in a different way than I had.
I think he realized I was serious about getting an overview of his system. So in time I
asked him, "How many of these V-1, V-2, V-3 things are there?" He replied, "Fourteen."
And then he wrote out the following for me:
Later I was to find out that he wrote similar things for several of his students. I now call
this a "fixed soprano tour." For a given chord, in this case G7, the soprano is held
constant, in this case on the flat 7, and a G7 chord from each of the fourteen voicing
groups is shown.
He had explained nothing to me about the V-System. And yet in a single line of music
notation he had concisely described and implied the entire V-System…sort of. There
was more. But that's all he would say. I went away determined to investigate further,
just as I had been in discovering the 43 four note chord qualities.
I began to study this line of music notation, this tiny seed from which bursts forth an
enormous, intertwining tree of guitar harmony. Notice that as you go from V-1 to V-14
the basic trend is to go from the most compact to the most spread out (although V-13
and V-14 are less spread out than V-11 and V-12). To me this is typical of the Ted
Greene approach: use logic to generate possibilities but don't be so strict that you lose
practicality or musicality. Probably the reason V-13 and V-14 ended up on the far right
is that they have more notes concentrated in the bottom close together, which sounds
muddy, especially when played in the low register of the guitar. So you can see, as you
move to the extreme right towards V-14, you come upon chords that are less used. And
also, as you move to the right, you generally have to stretch more. However, V-1s, the
most compact chords, on the extreme left, also can demand difficult stretches.
The big question I had was, "How do you know which category, V-1 or V-2..., a given
chord fits in?" I studied the line and eventually came up with my own answer! I
worked it out in detail and wrote it up on a few pages. At my next lesson, I showed
Ted my papers, my interpretation of his system. He looked at it somewhat dubiously. I
don't know what didn't seem right to him. I thought, "He must have another way of

“Who Is James?” page 3
thinking about this, but it must be similar to what I'm showing him because my way
works." He asked if he could photocopy the papers I had made. I said yes. We never
really discussed the issue again!
I don't think I had many more lessons with him but I remember the last one. A friend
of mine couldn't make his lesson with Ted so I "subbed" for my friend. When I showed
up at the appointed time, Ted seemed surprised to see me. I explained that I was there
instead of my friend. He looked at his appointment book and it showed that he was to
meet with Steve Vai at that time, not for a lesson but for some other reason. "But Ted,
I'm much more important than Steve Vai," I joked. We laughed. Luckily, the famous
Mr. Vai never showed up and I got a lesson.
The only time I saw Ted after that was at an incredible Sunday morning concert he gave
at Spazio Restaurant in Sherman Oaks, CA. Very few people were there for that
extraordinary performance.
I didn't find out that Ted had died until years afterwards. I didn't go to his memorial
service since I didn't know about it. One day I did a web search for "Ted Greene" and
found out that he had died. I was very sad. Eventually I found tedgreene.com.
After much more time, I thought to myself, Ted's V-System is really important and
should get out to the world. I wrote up an explanation of the V-System based on the
idea and papers I had shown to Ted. I submitted it to the web site for From The
Students. But it did not appear in From The Students.
Soon after Barbara Franklin, Ted's long-time girlfriend, and Paul contacted me and said,
"We've been trying to find you!" I was shocked that they knew my name. I soon found
out that Ted had written a couple of very cryptic personal pages about the V-System.
Included with them were the pages he had photocopied from me, heavily annotated
with his comments. He approved of my method and intended to credit me in his
forthcoming book. Of course he died before that could happen.
Barbara and Paul had not been able to figure out much from these scrawled pages.
Mostly Paul had figured out some of my method but not much of Ted's. So they
showed the pages to me and I went to work on deciphering them. It was detective
work, challenging brain work and also fun. I even made use of my knowledge of
computer programming to work out some details. I have figured out a lot about the V-
System and I'm going to explain it to you, step by step.
After I figured out a lot, I stopped working on it for a while. My mom died. Barbara
died. Other issues took up my time. Paul was very patient. I apologize to you who
have been waiting. We are now going to bring you Ted Greene's V-System! It is a
revolutionary organization of guitar harmony.

“Who Is James?” page 4
I've put quite a bit of time into figuring out the V-System and writing it up to present to
you. I've done this because I think the V-System is important and should get out to the
world. And out of gratitude to Ted. I apologize for any errors and for not presenting
things exactly the way Ted would have.
When I think of Ted, I think of a man with tremendous heart, musicality, and feeling. It
was a great honor to be a student of his, to be among maybe twenty people watching
and listening at Spazio on that particular Sunday morning to several hours of some of
the finest solo guitar ever played on the planet, and to have known this extraordinary
musician and man. I hope that my explanation of his V-System does it justice and
reveals the value of detailed investigation of chord spacing. Thank you for reading,
practicing, and learning.
----James